Hey guys, welcome to lecture 33,
this lecture's going to be on reshaping.
So we'll import the usual as always,
numpie as np, import pandas as pd,
and then from Pandas I'm going
to import series and data frame.
Alright, so first we're going to see
how the stack and unstack methods work,
in order to do that I'm
going to make a data frame.
So I'll say dframe1,
is equal to DataFrame,
and we'll create this data
frame using np arrange.
We'll get eight points.
And then I'm going to reshape
them as a two by four matrix.
And then we'll set the index
equal to panda index,
pd.Index, and
we'll have the list,
this be how about some cities.
And I'm gonna name this
index equal to city.
The reason I pass the index as
pd.Index instead of just saying index
equals this list of LA SF is
because Passing the PD dot index,
I'm also able to name it at the same time.
And then using columns,
I can do the same thing.
I can say columns equals pd dot index.
And I can pass A.
B, C, D.
[SOUND] And
I'm going to set this name equal
to just letter, just their letters.
And then we'll show it
hopefully there are no typos.
Okay, awesome, so we have the columns,
our letters ABCD and
the index city name LA and SF and
then we have 0 through seven,
eight points on a two by four matrix.
So, how can we use stack?
So we can use stack to pivot
the columns in to the rows.
To show you what I mean, I'll make a new
data frame, I'll call it dateframe_st for
stat and I'm going to set this equal to,
Data frame one.
And I'm gonna call the stack method on it.
And let's see how that goes.
Cool.
So now, in a sense, we've pivoted it.
And now we have the city, and
a sub-index of the letters.
If we wanna rearrange it back into
a data frame, we can do that.
We can just take dframe_st
that was pivoted and
I can say unstack to turn
it back into a dataframe.
We can also choose which
name to unstack by.
So instead of unstacking that way,
I could also say dframe_st.
I can call the unstack method on it and
specify that it should be
unstacked by the letter.
Let's see what happens there.
The exact same thing since
that was the default unstack.
What if I unstack by the city, though?
Let's check out what happens.
Find unstack by the city.
Then is basically reversed, and now you
have the city as being the columns and
letter is now your index for
that data frame, so you can specify and
unstack what you want the columns and
index to be.
So let's see how stack and
unstack handle null values.
So in order to do that,
I am going to make two series.
I'll call the first one ser1,
set it equal to series.
Let's say zero, one, two,
and then I'll make my
index equal to just some letters Q,
let's just say X, Y.
I'll make another series, ser2.
Equal to four, five, six and
then we'll have my index
be X Y and Z for instance.
Okay, let's make sure that works.
Cool.
So I have my two series.
So, I'm going to use, I'll set my D
frame so I can make a data frame.
I'm going to use concat.
Remember from concatenate?
I will use that to make the data
frames out of the two series,
so we have a little review of four.
And I'll set the keys equal to Alpha
and Beta.
And then we'll just check out
what that data frame looks like.
Awesome, so
it's not quite a data frame yet.
It's just two series that have been
pushed together with concatenate.
If I wanna make it into a dataframe,
I'll have to unstack it.
So I'll say dframe unstack and
now it shows up as a dataframe.
Cool.
So we have null values.
How do I get rid of those?
Well, using pandas, if we have our d frame
on stack, and
let's say I stacked it again, that will
automatically filter out the null values.
So let's make sure of that.
Cool.
So, again, just like before,
the null values have been filtered out.
So you get null values when you
unstack into a data frame, but
if you stack it back into that
combination of those two series,
you don't get those null values anymore.
If we don't want to do this and
we actually want to keep
these null values from the data frame,
we can do that as well.
So let's set our data frame to equal
dFrame.unstack.
So now if I call my data frame,
I have this permanent data frame with
two null values there at Q beta and
Beta Z, I'm sorry, Alpha Z.
And now if I were to call
stack on this normally,
it would get rid of the null values,
but if I wanted to keep them there,
I could call stack, and
pass the argument dropna equal to false,
and now I've kept those na values
the Alpha z and the Beta q.
So that's about it for reshaping,
it's mainly just being able to
use the unstack and the stack.
And next up we'll learn more about
pivoting data frames in a similar fashion.
All right, I'll see you there.